Okay, I guess the tape is rolling, so we might as well start.
First of all, I wondered how you became involved in science fiction when you were younger.
Did you read it a lot when you were young?
Yes, I started reading science fiction as opposed to about the earliest form of literature
that I read.
I never made a mental distinction between science fiction and fantasy.
Anything is that nature because my parents brought it to me to read, and I just simply
regarded it as the most interesting reading material that I had accessible.
So naturally, when I began turning to writing, that's what I wrote.
Why did you start writing science fiction?
Well, actually, they took my television program off the air.
Our television, at that time, I was 10.
Television hadn't been around in private homes very long.
I had just time enough to get clearly addicted to television science fiction, and then it
ran at this course, and it was gone from the air.
So I, you know, a set of mourning and went into the bedroom, picked up a tablet and
then started writing my own novels.
Your first published novel, I think, was the year 1976, the date of April?
Yes, yes.
Have you published any stories before then?
No, not for one of trying, but I've never regarded myself as a short story writer.
I don't tend to think in that convenient length, and consequently, I wrote novels.
And novels, and novels.
And it was, actually, turned in brothers very first, and since they seem to be some question
about it being a little long, as many of my works didn't be, I very, very quickly wrote
the date of April while teaching school, et cetera, and managed to get it finished inside
two months.
One thing I wondered is, you said that you didn't distinguish between science fiction and
the other reading that you did.
But I wonder why you didn't do some other kind of writing instead of science fiction.
I think you could have been a writer in almost any area that you tried.
I don't write the other things because I didn't like them.
In general, I find that I suppose the only thing outside of science fiction that I've
ever tried in my hand at writing has been mystery.
And I do care for the modern science, though, and I've always viewed them as a great deal
and more fun to read than they are to write, mostly because you have to be extremely
controlled.
And I suspect that mystery writers have to know who did it.
And I'd rather not know the end of my books.
The other thing that I've tried in my hand at is historical fiction.
And I find, again, that's a straight-jacket because you're rather well-held with what
all happened, whether or not it makes artistic sense.
So just for the sheer pleasure of writing, I'd prefer science fiction.
Okay.
Was it the only real one that published that first book?
Yes, it was.
Have you established any contact or made any attempts?
Or was that the first one that you'd sent out?
No.
You mean with other publishing sources and what have you?
Yeah, I would send it with that.
Well, actually, my group's been estimated with Rohan as an editor because I had gone through
my library finally after seven years of trying to sell things and I thought, well, there
must be a system to this.
You see, I had no professional help at all.
And I began searching my library to see what editor had published the majority of works
and writers that I liked, figuring that we might have something in common as far as taste
goes.
So I began researching Don Rohan to see what his preferences were, where we differed and
where we were similar.
And so I began to conclude more and more that we were fairly well-centedical when it came
to taste, not quite the same all the way down the line, but generally there's a broad
area of overlap.
So I found it very easy to work with.
Okay, I just had one more question on your back end and so forth.
Do you identify or do you think there are any influences, either writers or anything in
your back, or I guess in terms of science fiction writers, that did any influence on you
and the way you write?
Well, it's very difficult to put a pin it down because I am one of the most Catholic science
fiction writers, readers who are likely to find, I read everything I can get my hands
on and noise and have on the speed reader.
But classically speaking, I suppose that our poopliest or jilliest model is one of the
outstanding influences on my writing simply because he's one writer that I spent an enormous
amount of time with, at least historically speaking, and when I was doing my studies.
In terms of science fiction writers that have had a great yellow influence on me, I can
have a hairy bait, a power, rubber tower.
It was very difficult in the town that I grew up in to find any science fiction.
Jack Williams was one and Edgar Rice Burroughs and so on.
But the time that you see I kept getting run out of the store, they would locate a juvenile
back there in the science fiction section and immediately they would begin to suggest
that possibly I should be looking at the Dick and Jane novels somewhere else.
And so I did have a little difficulty both in library and in bookstores trying to get
out of science fiction books undetected.
Okay, I think you said you'd sit out or written brothers of earth before Gated
of Abrail, but I still wanted to ask why you so early got into writing the, I guess I
would call it a heroic fantasy, I'm not sure that's how you'd identify with Gated
of Abrail, but how did you sort of begin with that kind of a?
Well, I didn't.
They weren't the first books that I had written.
There are others which are tentative efforts that didn't tan out in one way or another,
everybody.
I won't say everybody, but a majority of writers tend to have them.
My first love is really technology.
The only thing is that I had been out of the technological mainstream while they had made
numerous scientific advances that I was not current with.
And it annoys me a great deal to the old that I'm writing something that is not technically
accurate.
So, or that I have glossed over something.
It irritates me personally to postulate well, for instance, we have a gravity field here
which keeps everyone's feet on the deck.
I want to know how it works.
So consequently I wrote heroic fantasy while I was doing a great deal of reading in scientific
American.
Also heroic fantasy is an area where I have a good deal of expertise since I have a major
in classic history, archaeology, anthropology, this sort of thing.
But I'd always been a sort of a hobbyist and a little more than a hobbyist since it was
one of my fields in the history of technology.
Okay, I'm not sure I'm going to pronounce some of these names right.
So after I hear you pronounce them, we'll get them right when we do the show.
I guess it's more gain.
I still have a little puzzlement about her.
Was she a creature or a force existing before the call or the call?
I'm not sure how that's pronounced.
They're called, well actually, now there's some of this I'm not about to give away as
regards to the history of more gain because that gets into the possibility of a book that
I'm working on at the moment.
The first set of books, the gate books, involves much more the character of Vanya, who is a
medieval man.
I have to take his viewpoint or they cease to be heroic fantasy and they begin to be
a science fiction novel, pure and simple because more gain is far more technologically
sophisticated than he is and if it were told from her viewpoint it would begin to be
a thing of numbers and calculus.
More gain is far more advanced, exactly where she comes from and what she is I've preferred
to leave to the readers' estimation or I will say that your surmises are fairly well
down the center.
Okay, that's why I wasn't sure.
I thought maybe I missed something.
I thought you were being a little ambiguous.
It is deliberately vague.
Firstly because the character of more gain has evolved as I've done it also partially
because I have wished to keep those books as heroic fantasy or the reason that the
technology of the gate is so vague that again I prefer to know how things work and since
that one is far more fantastical than some of the other technology I work with I prefer
to keep it in the realm of fantasy.
Okay, you also just said that you might be working or you are working on some more books
that might involve that material.
I was going to ask, did you, when you started the first book, did you have the idea of
a trilogy?
No, actually the first book quit where it quit except that they had been entered into the
books and print of theories which rather surprised me.
And so I thought, well, why not?
For a little while I have found it relaxing and to a certain extent still do.
To alternate both my reading and my writing of hard tech with fantasy because I do produce
at an enormous rate compared to some other writers who may labor one or two years on a book.
Well a good deal of anyone working on a book for one or two years is not writing time,
it's thinking time.
And because physically to write it down takes a precious little while, you can write any
given book down in less than a month.
You can just think of that.
So I have found that to give my imagination a rest as it were, it does really help to shift
gears between books.
That's why I tend to do things which are radically different from the other.
I may worry over a similar theme, I may do it once in science fiction and once in fantasy,
thus providing endless amusement or fodder for reviewers who are trying to find some sort
of a common theme.
Well basically it's just that I've just finished working with that and the storytelling
around in my head.
So I did it in a different medium just as an artist may tend to paint a lot in blue because
that's the color they had last on their palette.
I don't think there's any particularly deep significance to some of these similarities
just that some of the works were done in sort of opposition to each other, different
types, different styles.
Was there any reader response that made you continue with that series?
Well there has been a great deal of reader response.
I think that there is a list.
I had a great deal of fun writing it.
I looked back on it and decided I had a great deal of fun writing it.
Sometimes the character of Morgane Eurotated me so much that I was just about ready to
give up throwing the towel while I was creating it.
I think I tend to sympathize much more with Vanya.
But yes there has been a very strong reader response to it and I've always had a really
great affection for this trilogy myself.
It's one of the few works that I have really felt that I could go back to and possibly
do another three books.
Usually when you've written three books on anything you tend to be burned out on it.
Because while a reader may devour it in a single night or series of nights and it's
gone for the writer, you had to live with it constantly for better part of the year on
each segment.
So for some curious reason, Morgane books are one of the only ones that I really find
easy to return to.
You mentioned that Vanya was a medieval man and of course Eurotated me so I look back
to the medieval formulas.
But it seems to me that you have in some ways reversed the normal formula and making the
I guess the heroic part of the book, the woman and I don't know what you'd want to call
her, not sidekick but her helper, I guess the male.
I think some readers respond that they were not surprised at that but it was a little
unusual to have the male in that position.
Well, I think that there is some literary tradition for it.
The notion of courtly love is one possibility.
There is also the fact that in terms of the age of which those characters were created
I had really conceived both characters when I was about probably 14 and again I think
a reason why it's much easier for me to return to those because they almost come out
of my extreme youth and there's one always has an affection for things of that sort.
They are sort of archetypal with us.
But in one form or another they are very early creations of mine.
And as such, that was the time at which I was really just beginning to toy with being
able to do male characters at all.
Of course, there was the version that is in print was done completely separate from any
of the early works.
I didn't look at it for refer to the earlier works.
When I did this, when I did Kate of Israel, I just sort of remembered it a long time ago.
But I suppose that's the reason that the characters flowed away they did.
There's also the fact that I think that artistically to me made a fairly interesting story in terms
of the relationship between the two characters, the fact that Ghania's best setting scene,
as you will, is arrogance, pride and temper.
And if you can conceive of any situation for a medieval man in which arrogance, pride and
temper are going to get a little afraid, it's the sort of situation.
Okay, I'm going to go ahead and move on to a whole new topic.
I think one of the things that impressed me the most, and I'm sure it impresses most
of your readers rightly, is your construction of alien cultures.
And I was curious as to whether you use models or anilons for them or do you create them
out of thin air.
Yes, and no, and both.
One of my areas of study is for mentioned is anthropology.
I have also done a great deal of study in ecology, biology, genetics, although strictly
as an amateur, and that feels because it is a very complex one.
And in a way, I do take some items from the knowledge that I have, earthly animals, cultures,
communities, ecosystems, and so on.
But most of my knowledge of human culture is, again, rather strange.
And I know the prehistoric or bronze age that holds span up to the iron age, much better
than I do say later periods.
So a great deal of what I know about human history is so basic or lies so far back down
in the time track that a divergence from what happened at any given point is going to
produce massive alterations in an urban culture much further along the line.
Consequently, for instance, when I did the Faded Sun novels, which are basically a desert
culture, I did not pattern it off any modern desert culture about which I know Frank
Lee.
Nothing.
I patterned it strictly by taking what I know about desert survival.
And earlier, nomadic cultures, your honor, can thrive a biology that would work under
the extreme conditions that I postulated.
And then grew elements from here and there.
It's very strange that I now get letters from people that say that it very closely resembles
a modern, to-restrialed, nomadic culture.
But this is strictly a surprise to me.
I suppose it just says that I knew something about the variation once.
Okay.
Why does then, I guess in many of your books, I would even say the majority, you somehow
in the book have a theme or motif of alien human closeness.
You know, sometimes your humans have actually become part of an alien civilization if they
don't at least they become very close to it.
That is that fascinating to you so much.
Well, partly I suppose it's what I said earlier that one can't to toss one idea around until
you've got that color completely off your palate.
I don't know how long it will continue to fascinate me, I suppose there's a limit to
how much one can say about any given thing.
And not all of my novels involve aliens among those novels.
I can't some that are not yet published but are only partially complete if I say that
I have about 13 works in progress at the moment you may understand.
But so what is on the stands is sort of the tip of the iceberg, at least as far as my
body work.
But indeed I do a great deal of it.
I think part of the fascination for it lies in the fact that I myself have been a lifelong
student of cultures and if there's anything that I can conceive of that is slightly stranger
than being lost in Greece and unable to speak the local dialect, it's being lost somewhere
else and an even worse shape and managed managing to survive it.
It pleases me also because it is a type of conflict that one can develop that does not
involve necessarily everyone taking sides lining up and starting to shoot at each other.
Although this sometimes does happen.
It is a way to get sort of like the man against nature stories, you can have a very exciting
story about a man who is simply trying to survive in a hostile environment.
Some environments don't involve icebergs, they involve cities.
They involve cultures that you've never met before.
And I do hope just as a matter of practical philosophy that one thing this age of ours
is begun to produce is an understanding in the human race that we can not only get along
with each other, we can get along with other creatures on the same planet.
Perhaps it is the final lesson that any species learns before they are fit to set foot in
the space.
At least I hope this is the case which may guarantee the peaceful intention of potential
neighbors.
I think you have so much to answer my next question which is going to be if you deliberately
counterpointed alien in human cultures.
You just suggested there would be a value to that.
We should learn to live with other species and so forth.
That would be a fair statement that you do counterpoint, liberty.
One of the most difficult things on the face of the earth for instance is for two people
who do not speak each other's language well to communicate.
It is also certainly true as diplomats have discovered for centuries that you can speak
someone else's language perfectly and still have trouble getting your point across.
Simply because language extends into time, history and accumulated meanings as well as
it does just the present meanings which are contained in the dictionary, context and history
have a great bearing on language so that when you begin to talk about the difficulties
of communicating species to species where you may even have a totally different psychology
that your problems are much more severe.
It is also an area of ongoing research in the scientific community.
It is the studies that are done with primates, the studies that are done with dolphins and
with whales.
Mankind as a whole outside of the science fiction field is finally beginning to wake up to the fact
that you do not necessarily have to think like a human being to be, quote,,
intelligent.
That intelligence is a function of many different things and anyone who has ever talked in school
will rapidly come to the conclusion that intelligence is not a quantity that can be neatly assessed.
It has to do with the spatial perceptions and relationships with the ability to compare
and grant a lot.
Human intelligence has made up of many many different factors.
One may be particularly gifted in one or more of them, not so gifted in others and it makes for a great
range of abilities.
Even more so when you are dealing with different species who may have completely different
environments, whose visual range may be different to the, some may see, for instance, into the
infrared, some may hear sounds which are not audible.
So on and so forth, just biologically speaking, so you may have a psychology and a history
that are very different from anything that we are anticipating simply because of a biological
barrier.
Okay.
I guess I'll just move on to a question.
Questions on a few of your works.
Obviously I'm not going to be able to hit all of your works.
We don't have time to do that, but there were a few of them all wanted to sing along.
I think it's pronounced the pride of Chinner.
Chinner.
Yes, the pride of Chinner.
Okay.
Let me just give you, ask you this question.
First of all, is it the honey?
Honey, really.
I somehow receive the impression their society, their physical makeup was in some ways based on
lions.
Yes, absolutely.
This is one case where I've taken the species of lions.
And in a very simple way, devised a culture of an advanced species which, which very closely
parallels the biology and if you will, social patterns of a lion pride, the title of the
books, of course, is three-way pun.
Meaning the pride of lions, the pride of the race and the name of the ship?
Yes.
How the creature involved together?
And also that would be why the females are the ones who go space-faring in the male stay
at home.
Yes.
Among the lions you will notice that the females do the hunting.
Okay, I'm proud of myself.
Think of that out.
But Ty, they're the human in that book.
And of course he is totally alone.
He's very pitiful creature.
You know, the only one of his kind, I guess, until the end of his book.
Very unheroic.
And you know, it's a lot of stuff I realize.
I'm reading the book from an alien point of view and here's a human being and I'm feeling
sorry for him, which is unusual.
I guess that was just for the line of the story.
Do you do that on purpose to give us a different, maybe perspective on humanity?
I've never seen a bad-boone react to it.
No, it's raw terror.
It primates nervous system is not really set up to be setting in the center of a pride of
lions.
It's really one of the most unkind things I believe that you could do to a human being
as far as social patterns would be to drop them right into the middle of a feline culture.
Because the moves are all wrong.
Well, for instance, Polly being a primate smiles.
And of course this is exactly the wrong thing to do.
You know what a lion does when it smiles.
It's not a friendly gesture.
Every gesture he makes is wrong.
Every gesture they make is wrong at least as far as he's concerned.
He is, however, a very heroic human being if you just simply analyze what he has done.
He has managed to survive a very horrendous situation.
He has managed to collect himself with some dignity out of a situation which would have broken
drastically in a average individual would have definitely come out of it damaged.
He's been forced to take horrendous decisions and he's been dumped into a situation where even his
personal value is of some question.
And yet he manages to stand up on a sign beaten and confront the honey captain with a here I am
come and see if you can do something about it kind of attitude which is of course what wins the captain's respect.
In the beginning he calms down a little bit as you will see when he begins trying to deal with him doing what any
sensible person would do when confronted with a situation where you suspect that the beings around you are at least
sensually friendly and there's no need provoking something that would be a total misunderstanding.
So he does remain a little bit quiet but he's quiet partially because he's smart and is trying to absorb more data than he gets out.
Okay I see that now and I suppose yeah in terms of what where he was I guess he was sort of courageous individual.
Let me move on for just a second to damn the station.
The plotting in a setting of that novel is impressed me a great deal.
Did you use a strict extrapolation to advise the society and the company and the merchants and the way you set that book up?
Yes I follow the NASA reports. I'm a great supporter of the spacecraft and I do follow it very very closely.
And one of the things that is always interested me is the economic mechanisms the reason for going into space, the reason for colonization.
I also recall being cops and rather inaccurate things when I was back in chemistry roll about the altruistic motives for colonizations to hear some of the old tales I heard.
The Greek call went out and colonized the Mediterranean just because it was there or just because they felt it would be a noble thing to do.
Which is very far from the truth it was economic necessity.
Many of them were getting out of Greece because the pressures at home were incredible.
In this particular instance I simply took the situation we presently have and as a background or the novel I simply extrapolated our present situation over the couple of hundred years.
This is pretty well what I see going on based on modern economic necessity and a little bit of altruism and the sense that science and science with the sake of science will continue.
If you like we've already launched the first star probe. Our problem is that right now we haven't got the budget or the research to enable them to do a loop and come back to us.
But I imagine that really in the next century there will be such proplotions.
Was that a bit more difficult to plot and harder to write than you others?
It was a bear. It really was. I think because it was sort of a collection of all the things that I had been trying to do up to that point.
All the research, all the reading that I had been doing and trying to rationalize this universe of mine.
To give it some sort of a scientific accuracy. The one thing you have to grant me is faster than light travel. Everything else I designed is at least within near reach of archaic abilities.
The plot is necessarily complex because we're dealing here with the future of the human race.
The human race is actually the character in this novel in one odd sense.
There are a number of specimens that are not too nice. Fortunately there are some who are at least in my own estimation, good people.
And the novel follows the activities of a great many of them at a very hazardous moment for humanity.
That at which part of humanity is literally breaking free of earth, never to come back again.
And in which another portion of humanity is trying to retain their heritage and to try to reach an accommodation between what they were and what they are.
And manage to deal with the new realities that are meeting at the same time.
Okay, this probably isn't a fair question to ask an author. I've had a number of them say, make up your own mind.
But in terms of who you side with, if you side with anybody, I was probably more identified more with Sydney Mallory than anybody in the book.
Would that be anywhere near what you intended?
To a certain extent, yes. Sydney Mallory is a very inagmatic individual in some ways.
She's difficult to, even for a creator to get a handle on.
There are a number of things going on with her. To a certain extent, it disturbs me that she is as she really cares as she is.
Because when you analyze what she does, you really have to line her up on the side of the not nice people.
On the other hand, if you got into an argument with her on morality, she would point to the morality that created the ghastly situation on the station and asked who got the better results.
So Mallory is forever dealing in very, very uncomfortable paradoxes. Often even the author does not like what Mallory does.
But sometimes it is the most direct solution that saves the greatest number of lives.
She is, as I say, sort of an uncomfortable figure.
As that history of that rural develops in subsequent books, I think it will become clear that Mallory's influence persists among those people and it is not always a whole for one.
Mallory can be a very palatable, very appealing individual. The problem is that some people persist in following her policies and come to less happy results.
So it is a kind of a novel that lays the foundation for a good many things. And for instance, the security organization in the faded sun, the weather sinister degus, I believe, is named is, is several centuries down the road Mallory's creation.
Okay, that is interesting. I was just going to move on to that. Let me give you one more question on down below station.
In fact, it applies to faded sun too in a couple of your other books. You have already mentioned the fact that we have to give you the faster the night travel.
Still, considering the so-called jump and the same space battles in down below station, I don't think I read any more convincing space battles than those.
The faster the night travel, the jump and so forth, you didn't make any attempt to that and I guess you can't back it up or prove anything there.
There was a much science behind that or a myth that I don't know how you did it, where it was convincing.
Well, I worked very hard at it. I always loved Dr. Smith.
And one of the things that I always felt that I would like to bring back to the field of science fiction, if I could, was the space yarn.
I mean, for a long time now, science fiction, we've been on planets, we've built cities, we've gotten so earthbound that a lot of the romance and space flight itself has gone down.
I'm unexpressed in literature. And I wish to be able to develop a mechanism which would enable me to write oddly enough, after working my brain cell on it, the simple kind of story that I used to enjoy when I was young.
And I suddenly realized that I was in my neck in a relativistic kind of all sorts of things.
One of the things that fascinated me when I began to work out the battles, and even there I took some shortcuts as anyone who wants to cut in an argument, I will freely admit that there were some things I had to do for artistic value.
But one of the things that I began to discover was that in terms of being on one of those ships in the battle, that suddenly in a very practical way, I was up against the Einsteinian stoppage of time.
Because when you are traveling near sea, near the speed of light, a board one of those ships all time has stopped.
You exist at one moment, traveling forever. If you send a message, it can go no faster than you do.
And that message will arrive at the same time. So essentially you exist in a frozen segment of time, an event horizon which is perpetuating itself across the system in which you're operating.
And I began to find that a rather mind-bending concept, particularly when I was trying to plot out the strategy.
If your enemy exists as an event horizon and you exist as another one, how thickens you are going to figure out where he is.
Okay, listen, David has to flip the tape about.